---
title:  Conclusion
subtitle:  
author:
- Maya Daurio ^[University of British Columbia]
Address: Department of Anthropology, 2104 – 6303 NW Marine Drive, Vancouver, BC Canada V6T 1Z1
Email: spinosese@gmail.com
Phone: (720) 220-8704
Keywords: 
abstract:
output:
   pdf_document:
       toc: true
       number_sections: true
       highlight: tango
link-citations: true
linkReferences: true
bibliography: [./conclusion.bib]
---

*The World and Life Won't be the Same Again*

On a cold and blustery day in December 2022, I sat on a couch next to my grandfather's cousin who would turn ninety-two years old on Christmas Day. We were warming ourselves in front of the woodstove in my extended family's new house built just within the two year window mandated by our insurance company after our old house had burned in the Cameron Peak Fire. This house was in a different location because of flooding danger at the old homesite. One of my aunts sat in a rocking chair nearby. In a few days time, multiple other family members would arrive to celebrate Christmas together at the new house for the first time. This Christmas gathering was organized for Sarah Beth and for her cousin Shelley, also in her 90s. The two of them spent every summer of their childhoods at the old family house, in an era before electricity had been installed up the Poudre, when there were kerosene lamps and an ice box for refrigeration. Sarah Beth spanned all six generations of our family's tenure in the Poudre Canyon. She held a repository of cumulative memories and represented an enduring sense of belonging passed down from one generation to the next in my family. At the same time, that one person's lifetime could stretch across six generations extending over a total of nearly 130 years was an indication of how shallow my family's history is in the Poudre, relative to Indigenous peoples who moved through this canyon for hundreds if not thousands of years [@burrisPeoplePoudreEthnohistory2006] and to the ecological and geological timescales of this landscape made more noticeable by fire and flooding. I asked Sarah Beth what it was like for her losing the old home and seeing the changes to the land as a result of the wildfire.

"Things don't stay the same forever. ...kind of the hope there...there's still something to come. It'll be different. History and good things don't come to an abrupt end. They evolve into something different. Almost as big a change as the wildfire to the countryside is all the buildings along the way coming up now. It used to be none of those would be there and that made it very different. ...I guess in some ways it's the impermanence of life and things in places and just [being] thankful when that's not the end, something else comes along."

In this concluding chapter, I reflect on the themes represented by Sarah Beth's enduring sense of belonging and reckoning with large-scale loss and change.

## Insights and Reflections

Building on previous theorizations of landscape and disaster in anthropology and social science scholarship on wildfire more broadly, this dissertation introduces new contributions in understanding the social, ecological, and political trajectories of wildfire. Drawing on over two years of ethnographic research involving participant observation, semi-structured interviews, and a landscape-based methodology incorporating walking conversations and go-alongs, this dissertation explores the following research questions: how do people make sense of large-scale landscape transformations and affective dimensions of loss and change wrought by wildfire and post-fire flooding; and how do people intersect with institutional responses to wildfire risk and recovery?

I offer three new insights as a result of my research findings. First, I introduce the concept of the social-ecological disturbance cascade to highlight how social consequences from wildfires, particularly in mountain watersheds, often emanate from the cascading ecological hazards that wildfires initiate. Conceptually linking social and ecological disturbances is important. Wildfire smoke is increasingly understood as extremely hazardous. For example, smoke from agricultural fires in Indonesia in 2015 is estimated to have caused over 100,000 excess deaths across Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore [@koplitzPublicHealthImpacts2016]. Wildfire can also change the hydrological conditions of a watershed such that flooding, debris flows, and landslides are more likely for up to ten years following wildfire [@rengersLandslidesWildfireInitiation2020]. All of these watershed-related hazards have intersecting consequences for people's lives, both in areas where the wildfire occurred and downstream in the form of flooding, adverse water quality, or impacts to drinking water infrastructure. While ecological disturbances from wildfire are anticipated and constitute an active area of research, accompanying longitudinal social impacts are less understood and not as easily quantified. Accounting for multiple hazards across diverse jurisdictions and time horizons, and the complex and enduring ways people's lives are affected, can help to reshape mechanisms for response and recovery to support the range of social and ecological disruptions associated with wildfire.

Second, I propose centering co-stewardship with and agency for communities in cultivating practices of living with fire. I challenge certain prevailing narratives, revolving around the personal responsibility of those who live in the wildland urban interface (WUI) to follow best practices to reduce wildfire risk around their homes. I argue that the language of personal responsibility and the widespread use of the term WUI are counterproductive to reducing risk and can be divisive in a few key ways. One, the idea of the WUI artificially separates those who live in flammable landscapes from those who do not, even though our assumptions about what constitutes a fire-prone landscape have been challenged in recent years by, for example, the largely suburban Marshall Fire in Colorado and the fire which tore through the town of Lahaina in Hawaii. Assumptions about the WUI obscure local cultural, political, and ecological contexts of wildfire risk and craft a singular idea of community wildfire exposure and the reasons behind it.

Two, the concept of the WUI reinforces an understanding of wildfire as contained within the perimeter of the burn area, ignoring the very real danger of wildfire smoke, which can affect places thousands of miles away, and post-fire flooding, which can impact communities and water quality many miles downstream from a fire. My research adds to existing scholarship on multi-hazard planning approaches [@eatonWeFightAlberta2023; @thompsonCapturingCascadingConsequences2024] that recognizes the importance of attending to the full scope of how cascading hazards can be linked both socially and ecologically. I encourage a reconceptualization of those who live in fire-adapted landscapes as potential stewards rather than as agents of risk in co-producing strategies for living with fire. Living with fire is a process, in which individuals, communities, and governments are engaged, and only ever more so, as we reorient toward a world with more extreme wildfire. Expanding our understanding of geographies of risk could help communities better prepare for the multiple hazards associated with wildfire, and also assist policymakers and governments to identify infrastructure gaps for improved integrated response.

Third, my research shows that people who live with, study, and work in fire engage in processual sensemaking in response to extreme wildfire and the large-scale environmental changes that result from it. Cumulative sensemaking helps people recalibrate their relationship with landscapes affected by fire and post-fire flooding and debris flows, helping people to cope with affective and environmental disruptions. I found that among participants there is widespread acceptance of our inability to control fire, in spite of the fact that society operated for a long time as if it were something we could indefinitely control. Post-fire, a perception of nature as agentive and powerful shapes people's understanding of fire and flood as ecological forces. My research indicates that for people intimately affected by disaster, recognizing ecological patterns and lifecycles within the destructive forces of fire and flood helps configure meaning out of the loss and change caused by them. This method of recalibration, intentional or unintentional, is a form of adaptive and agentive thinking that connects the "consequential materiality" [@kosekUnderstoriesPoliticalLife2006: 23] of the past with the present and future. I argue that broadening our temporal horizons associated with the material world can help us better prepare for, respond to, and to some degree, accept ecologies of impermanence.

## Theoretical and Methodological Contributions

My dissertation contributes to theoretical frameworks in anthropology, geography, and Indigenous Studies on temporality, materiality, and disaster. I build on these three sets of literatures through the lens of landscape, inspired by Tsing, Ingold, and Cresswell [@tsingWhenThingsWe2019; @ingoldBeingAliveEssays2011; @cresswellLandscapeObliterationPractice2003], who observe and immerse themselves in the material formations of the landscapes in which they conduct research. I contribute to a theoretical and methodological engagement with landscape as a means by which to understand the material entanglements of wildfire. Through "noticing landscapes" [@tsingPatchyAnthropoceneLandscape2019] in the context of wildfire and post-fire watershed impacts, I encourage an expansion of the temporal and geographic frames through which society and governments prepare for, respond to, and recover from wildfire disturbance cascades. I introduce the concept of a social-ecological disturbance cascade to signify the linkages between the cascading hazards emanating from wildfire's footprint in a culturally molded environment with their consequences for the human and more than human lives inhabiting that environment.

This dissertation builds on critical resilience and vulnerability approaches in disaster anthropology [@barriosResilienceCommentaryVantage2016; @hoffmanCultureCrucialFactor2015; @adamsMarketsSorrowLabors2013; @barriosGoverningAffectNeoliberalism2017]. I show how, following the Cameron Peak Fire, as in other post-disaster contexts, people were subject to technocratic processes and political time [@zeeHoldingPatternsSand2017] by capitalist-driven institutions [@kleinShockDoctrineRise2008] and the state in navigating insurance claims, rebuilding, and additional hazards, such as the removal of a bridge following damage by the Black Hollow debris flow. I also discuss how wildfire preparedness efforts are embedded in institutionalized, state-driven, bottom-up governance practices ascribing individual responsibility for risk reduction and prescribing the manner in which risk reduction can take place and the resources made available to implement such efforts. Wildfire risk reduction efforts target individuals and sometimes blame them for exposing themselves to wildfire by choosing to live in hazardous landscapes. I identify that settler colonial expansion facilitated by federal legislation continues to shape contemporary settlement patterns in fire-adapted landscapes and that the history of federal forest management contributes to wildfire risk in places like the Poudre Canyon. This dynamic has long been critiqued in the context of environmental degradation [@guthmanRepresentingCrisisTheory1997] and more recently in relation to climate change adaptation [@nightingalePowerPoliticsClimate2017; @chakrabortyMountainsInequalityEncountering2023] in the Global South. My research contributes to the still limited scholarship highlighting similar state-citizen relationships in wildfire preparedness and recovery practices in the Global North.

Another important contribution from disaster anthropology and those researching dramatic and often traumatic environmental changes is in identifying the affective dimensions of coping with the devastation of the "built, natural, and social environments" [@barriosGoverningAffectNeoliberalism2017: 5] emergent in post-disaster contexts [@asklandLivedExperiencesEnvironmental2018; @fowlerEmergingEnvironmentalEthics2018]. My research builds on this prior scholarship to examine the processual sensemaking practices in which community members, practitioners, and scientists engaged in the aftermath of the CPF, Colorado's largest wildfire to date, what Frida Hastrup refers to as the everyday "process of theorising" [@hastrupWeatheringWorldRecovery2011: 8]. This dissertation contributes to uncovering how people understand and manage loss and change in the context of different disasters, of wildfire specifically, and in situated landscapes. People who live in the Poudre Canyon, who study forests and watersheds and work in fire, have intimate relationships with the river and streams, the trees, certain geographic features, and the shape of the terrain itself. I suggest that people recalibrate their relationship to place and to the material lifeworlds contained within it through constructing meaning out of landscape changes rooted in an ecological understanding of those changes.

This dissertation also contributes methodologically to previous theoretical and empirical engagements with landscape [@tsingMushroomEndWorld2015; @carlsonAgenciesPresentLandscapemaking2022; @benderIntroduction2020; @mathewsLandscapesThroughscapesItalian2018]. I show how observations and movements on, through, and with human and more than human beings in a wildfire-affected landscape is critical in understanding the temporal and material configurations and agencies of the past and of a landscape becoming.

## Research Implications

My research findings are situated in a particular landscape revolving around a small community of people who live and work in and study this environment. It is only one of sixteen communities impacted by the CPF, and it suffered disproportionately fewer structure losses relative to the total number lost throughout the fire perimeter. One may ask how and why research about such a small place, so few people, so few home losses, matters for larger conversations or policy discussions about wildfire, disaster, or climate change. The arguments I lay out in this dissertation reflect precisely why the experiences of people during and after the CPF in the context of their lives in the Poudre Canyon matter for how we think about, plan for, respond to, and recover from wildfires everywhere.

First, as I describe in Chapter 2, recovery programs emerging from quantitative assessments of wildfire impacts such as structure loss can obscure less visible, more complex consequences and limit our temporal and spatial perceptual horizons to certain time periods and geographies. This leaves us less prepared to assign resources for long term recovery. Through ethnographic engagement with the Poudre Canyon community and with those who conduct research and work as fire and emergency practitioners here, my research uncovers the complexities and enduring emotional and structural challenges of post-fire recovery. Conceptually incorporating the social-ecological disturbance cascade in planning and policy formulations would inform management decisions, allocate resources, and encourage cross-jurisdictional cooperation in responding to timeframes and impacts associated with multiple, cascading hazards radiating out from wildfire.

Second, the upper Poudre Canyon is an example of a community in the WUI which both aligns with and defies assumptions about those who live in what I prefer to call fire-adapted landscapes. Demographically, this is not a community that is growing in population nor one in which new homes are continuously being built. It is, however, located in a forested, largely federally managed landscape, much of it now burned. As I describe in the Introduction and in Chapter 3, the patterns of settlement here are primarily attributable to the expulsion of Indigenous peoples from this area combined with federal legislation encouraging settler expansion across the western U.S. Federal forest management policies over the last century shaped the contemporary composition of forests and the behavior of fire. Ethnographic attention to the political and environmental histories of specific places highlighting the heterogeneity of communities grappling with wildfire risk, preparedness, and recovery can help shape policy and management approaches that account for the complex realities on the ground in different ecological, climatic, and weather contexts.

Third, the Poudre Canyon as a rural, unincorporated area has a particular relationship to risk exposure and management and to cross-jurisdictional governance. This dissertation explores what it means to live on relatively small pieces of land under county jurisdiction surrounded by vast federally managed landscapes, governed primarily from afar, in the context of wildfire and post-fire flooding. In Chapter 3, I outline how risks and hazards intersect with jurisdictional complexity and land and water management practices in a place where: the forests are owned by the USFS; the water is allocated to downstream municipalities but governed in part by a federal Wild & Scenic designation; the wildlife is managed by the state; wildfire is managed by the state but usually first by the fire district, followed by the county, unless the fire is on federal lands, in which case it is managed by the USFS; people and private properties are governed by the county, which also manages emergencies; and the highway running through the canyon is managed by the state. I also provide ethnographic context in describing how the only local government &mdash; the Poudre Canyon Fire Protection District (PCFPD) &mdash; and private landowners model important roles in risk management and land stewardship practices that benefit ecological systems and populations extending beyond the confines of the Poudre Canyon that could be applied elsewhere.

Fourth, attending to how people who have different kinds of relationships to the Poudre Canyon make sense of landscape-altering wildfire and post-fire flooding contributes to knowledge production guiding how we all might better understand the human and more than human materialities and temporalities of the world we live in and how we might cope with living in a more fiery world with all its repercussions.

## Future Research Possibilities

This dissertation opens up a more expansive research agenda for ethnographic engagement with wildfire and its human and more than human entanglements [@martindaleEntanglementTinkeringStructural2009]. In Colorado, the Southern Ute Indian Tribe and Ute Mountain Ute Tribe are the only Indigenous groups with reservations and governments headquartered in the state, in spite of a history of at least forty-eight tribes having lived in what is now called Colorado at some time in the past and with over 200 Tribal Nations currently represented just in the Denver metro area [@daleyLongDenverWas2023]. What do these histories mean for the legacies of land use practices in this state that continue to inform how people and ecologies interact with wildfire? And how do these histories help us understand the ways in which "emergencies highlight constitutional habits, the patterns of public decision-making" [@feltesCrisisColonialismConstitutional2023] in the context of wildfire and disaster?

In Chapters 2 and 3, I address the jurisdictional complexities of wildfire in a place like the Poudre and trace some of these complexities back in time to land use practices deriving from federal policies dispossessing Indigenous peoples of land and encouraging settler colonial inhabitance on those lands. How different governance regimes influence relationships between citizens and the state is a subject which merits broader explorations than I cover in this dissertation, particularly for rural, unincorporated communities, and a subject for which greater ethnographic research is important. The broad theme of governance in relation to rural, unincorporated areas and how this affects planning and management practices around forest, fire, and flood management is also germane to how disaster recovery manifests for people in these areas. Although one-third of people in the U.S. live in unincorporated areas [@riveraEquitableRecoveryUnincorporated2024], research on lack of local governance or the role of rurality in disasters is still somewhat limited [@riveraUnincorporatedUnderservedCritical2023; @kapucuDisasterPreparednessResilience2013] across disaster literatures writ large and as part of ethnographic research in particular. 

Drawing on themes emerging from my research in the Poudre Canyon, I am interested in further explorations around the implications of being surrounded by federal land, managed for the public good, administered from afar, the governance of which invariably disproportionately affects those whose lives intersect with its borders. The geographer Jake Kosek examines this question in the context of a rural community in northern New Mexico [@kosekUnderstoriesPoliticalLife2006] where land grants dictated the prescription of lands as communal for certain communities but where over time, the USFS managed to fold these lands under federal jurisdiction. His work, and the question of how communities are impacted, in both positive and negative ways, by living in proximity to federal public lands, was made all the more relevant in 2022 when two fires started by the USFS merged to become New Mexico's largest wildfire decimating the same rural, northern New Mexico communities Kosek wrote about sixteen years before. It also points to the importance of illuminating local geographic, ecological, political, and social contexts, highlighting how ethnography can contribute to policy planning and governance discussions. Speaking to the question of jurisdictional complexity in governance practices, what does it mean for critical infrastructure such as private bridges, originally privately and affordably built, to be subject to contemporary county and federal regulations rendering their ongoing maintenance or replacement unaffordable, as in the case of the Poudre Canyon? And how does disaster planning and recovery intersect with this reality?

Because we are deemed to be in the middle of a "wildfire crisis" [@forestserviceConfrontingWildfireCrisis2022] by the U.S. Forest Service's own estimation, what does this say about the capacity of this agency to effectively manage forests and fire? The archeologist Bruce Trigger writes that "what pass as historical traditions are often mythical charters explaining and validating current social relations and these change as social relations change" [@triggerNativesNewcomersCanadas1985: 167]. Historians such as Stephen Pyne [@pyneFireAmericaCultural1997] and Jan van Wagtendonk [@vanwagtendonkHistoryEvolutionWildland2007] have both written about the history of the USFS and wildfire management in the U.S. There remains a role, however, for anthropological research in picking apart how to understand the purview of an agency like the USFS in relation to the trajectory of its landscape ideologies over time and how its competing interests &mdash; timber sales versus thinning and prescribed fire for ecological and fire risk reduction purposes, for example &mdash; shape the outcomes of wildfire and forest management. Future research could examine the tensions inherent in an agency like the USFS illuminating where investments and policies need to change in order for this country to adequately prepare for the kinds of wildfires we are seeing today and to recover from them, both socially and ecologically.

In Chapter 3, I develop the idea of cultivating stewardship, of land and of fire, among communities who live in fire-adapted landscapes and criticize interactions with homeowners that rely on harmful narratives, such as the notion of personal responsibility. I make brief reference to Amy Johnson's term "settlerism" [@johnsonSettlerSensibilitiesEnvironmental2023], or the idea that landscapes are shaped by colonial settlement projects, which I have also alluded to here in the Conclusion. Part of the basis of my argument promoting a perception of people in the Poudre as potential stewards stems from learning during my fieldwork about the deep connections and care people in the Poudre have for the river, the forests, the wildlife, and for some families, to particular places named and routinely visited over multiple generations. There is an enduring and important relationship here with place, even though the existence of this relationship is born out of a violent past enabling the settlement of non-Indigenous peoples in the first place. At the Cross-Boundary Landscape Resilience Workshop I attended in May 2023, which was primarily about wildfire, I listened to the Tribal Projects Coordinator for the USFS speak on a panel. She said tribes need decision-making powers to determine their own pathway toward collaboration with other government entities and that tribal nations' interests cannot only be represented by numbers. Stories and relationships are what matter in creating resilient partnerships, she said, and criticized the transactional nature of collaboratives attempting to work with tribal nations in the U.S. In my notes from the workshop about this panel, I wrote, "We can learn from these kinds of identifications and delineations and lessons around working with tribal communities. All communities' interests should be engaged through storytelling and relationships." What are the implications of mobilizing similar language and strategies for collaborating with Indigenous sovereign nations in order to highlight settler connections to landscapes and the meaning of these connections in developing land and fire stewardship practices?

Another interesting area of research for an anthropology of wildfire is in multi-sited ethnography examining wildfire narratives, land use practices, and ecological conditions in places with different cultural, political, and environmental histories. As I discussed in Chapter 3, entrenched assumptions exist regarding what is referred to as the WUI in the United States, and particularly in the western U.S., one of which is the idea that the 'wildfire problem' &mdash; or the 'WUI problem,' such as it is called &mdash; is constituted by the [increasing] presence of people in landscapes that burn. In areas of Mediterranean Europe, the wildfire problem is inversely characterized. It is agricultural abandonment and the absence of people in rural areas which is understood to leave them more susceptible to wildfire [@moreiraModellingImpactAgricultural2007]. What can we learn about how people understand and live with wildfire risk in different parts of the world that can inform the futures we choose to create in a world with more fire and ever more uncertain climates?

There is much more to examine in relation to understanding what it means to live with fire. As I have drawn attention to in this dissertation, wildfire, like other disasters, exists in relation to other hazards. I have identified how practices encouraged as part of living with fire often do not address how to live with smoke as well as wildfire risk, for example, or with post-fire flooding. A multi-hazard relationship which I am particularly interested to explore further is that between extreme heat and wildfire, particularly in the context of wildfire risk reduction measures. What are the implications for places where people are simultaneously exposed to these hazards within their homes? The Home Ignition Zone which provides guidance on reducing wildfire risk in five, thirty, and 100 foot zones out from the house includes recommendations to cut down trees which may contribute to igniting a home or igniting other trees as a ladder fuel. How consequential is removing trees from near homes in terms of extreme heat exposure? How should we consider the role of air conditioning and power outages during wildfires and wildfire smoke exposure in providing guidance to homeowners to remove trees providing shade? How might existing inequalities be exacerbated by risk reduction measures which attempt to reduce one hazard but introduce another?

## Outro

I attended a presentation in January 2024 by a landscape architect who, taking inspiration from Dutch perceptions of and designs considering water as a hazard, developed three strategies for cultivating practices of living in fire-affected and -adapted landscapes, characterized as defensive, resilient, and resistant [@gorskiBurntTaleThree2023]. His designs were beautiful and innovative, incorporating ideas for trails that guide visitors through forest mosaics comprising recently burned, young, and mature forests with lookout towers and burnt memorials along the way. I thought of this as intentionally cultivating an aesthetic for burned landscapes, a way to encourage people to recalibrate their relationship with particular ecologies.

```{r figureTitle17, eval = T, echo = T, fig.width = 3, fig.height = 2, echo=FALSE, fig.cap="Typical U.S. Forest Service trailhead sign. Photo by author.", fig.scap = "Roaring Creek Trailhead", out.extra=''}

# Call the image
knitr::include_graphics("../Images/trailhead.png")
```

Shortly after this, I went for a hike on a USFS trail that had been closed to the public for three years and had only been opened a couple months prior after sustaining damage from the CPF. USFS signs at trailheads here all follow a certain template. There is a map and description of the trail, information about what users are allowed on the trail, warnings about the presence of ticks, mountain lions, and bears, and an attached sign stating "Entering Burned Area." I was dismayed to see that there was no information explaining the three year-long trail closure, the CPF, or anything contextualizing this scorched but regenerating landscape, such as a suggestion to look out for new lodgepole pine seedlings and the particular fire adaptation of serotiny in some lodgepole pines. Certainly, the USFS is experiencing both funding and staffing challenges that might explain the absence of any context at all, but it is reflective of a broader cultural and political lack of attention to the affective dimensions of living with fire.

```{r figureTitle18, eval = T, echo = T, fig.width = 3, fig.height = 2, echo=FALSE, fig.cap="Thriving lodgepole pine seedlings four years after the Cameron Peak Fire. Photo by author.", fig.scap = "Lodgepole pine", out.extra=''}

# Call the image
knitr::include_graphics("../Images/lodgepole.png")
```

This dissertation demonstrates that people come to terms with loss caused by the wildfire and associated hazards in part through an understanding of ecological patterns and possibilities. I advocate for further research considering how we might create pathways for normalizing and cultivating our relationships with burned landscapes and for assigning more resources at different jurisdictional levels to do so. This is another ripe area for further ethnographically engaged research. We are living in a world with more conflagrations, and learning how to cope with this reality is an ongoing process of recalibration, not just for communities but also for fire practitioners, emergency managers, and scientists. The task at hand is not just about living with fire, which people have been doing for a long time, but about living with potentially ecologically and socially devastating fire with long term repercussions for forests, watersheds, and people. At the same time, it is about cultivating an appreciation for the nuances of how fire moves across particular landscapes and interacts with different tree species, for example, which have adapted to fire over time in diverse ways, for some of which moderate to high severity fire may be within its historical range of variability. Individuals, communities, and governments need to prepare for and respond to fire and its accompanying hazards situated in a realistic understanding of the temporal and spatial scales of harm and loss while also contextualizing the regenerative, ecologically beneficial functions of fire and flood.


# References